README.md, before:

# C4AA Sonar People Counter

Designed for our collaboration with [Treatment Action Group](http://www.treatmentactiongroup.org/) for the 2018 AIDS Conference. [Learn more.](https://c4aa.org/2018/08/amsterdamcaa2018/)

This project uses sonar to detect when people walk through a doorway. The signal is sent to an arduino, which triggers lights (and possibly sounds) and counts the person on 8in LED numbers overhead.

The project uses:

1. Arduino - we used a [RedBoard](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/13975)
2. [LCD Button Shield V2](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/retired/13293) - note: this is now retired, but it seems [similar shields are available](https://www.adafruit.com/?q=LCD%20Shield%20Kit%20w%2F%2016x2%20Character%20Display).
3. [6.5in tall 7-segment Display](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/8530)
4. [SparkFun Large Digit Driver](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/13279)

# TO DO Part 1: Basic Systems & Testing

## Strengthen wired connections between parts

Right now some of the wired connections are too delicate for use in the field.

### Arduino and big LEDs

Add ethernet cables and RJ45 jacks. Ethernet is more robust, the wires are easy to replace if lost, etc.

**Info/Research:**

- [Ethernet/RJ45](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/connector-basics#other-connectors)
- [Spring and screw connectors](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/connector-basics#temporary-connectors)


### Sonar Sensor to Arduino

- decide on best connection

## Test and fix sonar

- Sonar sensor is unreliable. Could be connections, could be other things?
- When sonar is disconnected - tell user through the LCD display

## Get LED strip lights working

LED strip lights flash when user walks through.

## General testing

Test the whole system: what’s most likely to break? Where do we need better connections? Where could the code be improved?

# Part 2: Ideas for Improvements

## Put everything into project boxes

Needs to look professional and not "scary" to people who aren't familiar with arduino and electronics.

### Arduino side

Pack the arduino, custom circuit boards, and sonar into one project box.

- The buttons and LCD display need to be visible and accessable.

### LED 7-Segment Display side

Build up – or rebuild – the LED Digit case. Right now it's wood and some of the circuits are exposed on the back. 

- Needs an ethernet jack attached
- Protect face and corners from scratches

## Re-make circuit board

Need a larger circuit board that what we have.

Is there a different arrangement that will better fit into project box?

Possibilities:

1. Simple protoboard with standoff holes mounted alongside the arduino. Connect with spring or screw terminals.
    - simple
    - larger
    - more to mount
1. Mount a protoshield on the underside
    - have to replace headers on the arduino
    - a lot of work
    - it's weird that nobody does this and there may be a reason.
1. [ProtoScrewShield](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/9729) - mounted inbetween arduino and button/LCD shield
    - [will the RJ45 Breakout fit?](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/716)
3. Custom Circuit Board
    - sort of expensive
    - permanent
    - a bit risky - if we get it wrong it's double the cost
 
## Add positionable mount for sonar sensor

Should be able to rotate left, right, up & down. 

[There seems to be Sonar mounts that exist already for robots.](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=sonar+sensor+ping+mount&atb=v136-1&iar=images&iax=images&ia=images) and on [Thingiverse](https://www.thingiverse.com/search?q=sonar&dwh=655d02734e5d166) Can we do better? Laser-cut case?

Positioning could be done with a [Ball-head Mount and a 1/4 Screw head](https://www.thingiverse.com/search?q=sonar&dwh=655d02734e5d166) coming off the project box.

![Ball Head Mount Image](docs/img/ballheadmount.jpg "")

## Add sound

Lower priority

Need to determine how - what board? Would be great to use bluetooth and connect to a bluetooth enabled speaker, they seem to be around and affordable.

## Other improvements in any category - aesthetics, stability, usability

# Part 3: The Making

Get parts, make adjustments, refine, test, new ideas for improvements, make, test, refine, etc.

# Part 4: Documentation and Instructions

We should do this as we go along. It starts now!

# Part 5: Physical door (if there’s time)

Experiment with designs, or creating specifications for building on site.

Commit message:

project box ideas
and photo

README.md, after:

# C4AA Sonar People Counter

Designed for our collaboration with [Treatment Action Group](http://www.treatmentactiongroup.org/) for the 2018 AIDS Conference. [Learn more.](https://c4aa.org/2018/08/amsterdamcaa2018/)

This project uses sonar to detect when people walk through a doorway. The signal is sent to an arduino, which triggers lights (and possibly sounds) and counts the person on 8in LED numbers overhead.

The project uses:

1. Arduino - we used a [RedBoard](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/13975)
2. [LCD Button Shield V2](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/retired/13293) - note: this is now retired, but it seems [similar shields are available](https://www.adafruit.com/?q=LCD%20Shield%20Kit%20w%2F%2016x2%20Character%20Display).
3. [6.5in tall 7-segment Display](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/8530)
4. [SparkFun Large Digit Driver](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/13279)

# TO DO Part 1: Basic Systems & Testing

## Strengthen wired connections between parts

Right now some of the wired connections are too delicate for use in the field.

### Arduino and big LEDs

Add ethernet cables and RJ45 jacks. Ethernet is more robust, the wires are easy to replace if lost, etc.

**Info/Research:**

- [Ethernet/RJ45](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/connector-basics#other-connectors)
- [Spring and screw connectors](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/connector-basics#temporary-connectors)


### Sonar Sensor to Arduino

- decide on best connection

## Test and fix sonar

- Sonar sensor is unreliable. Could be connections, could be other things?
- When sonar is disconnected - tell user through the LCD display

## Get LED strip lights working

LED strip lights flash when user walks through.

## General testing

Test the whole system: what’s most likely to break? Where do we need better connections? Where could the code be improved?

# Part 2: Ideas for Improvements

## Put everything into project boxes

Needs to look professional and not "scary" to people who aren't familiar with arduino and electronics.

Something like this, lasercut with windows (but opaque) could be good enough:

![Ball Head Mount Image](docs/img/lcdbuttonshield-box.jpg "")

Or we mount everything in a project box and cut holes in the side. Leaning toward the above.

Bonus: have the buttons on the surface of the interface.

### Arduino side

Pack the arduino, custom circuit boards, and sonar into one project box.

- The buttons and LCD display need to be visible and accessable.

### LED 7-Segment Display side

Build up – or rebuild – the LED Digit case. Right now it's wood and some of the circuits are exposed on the back. 

- Needs an ethernet jack attached
- Protect face and corners from scratches

## Re-make circuit board

Need a larger circuit board that what we have.

Is there a different arrangement that will better fit into project box?

Possibilities:

1. Simple protoboard with standoff holes mounted alongside the arduino. Connect with spring or screw terminals.
    - simple
    - larger
    - more to mount
1. Mount a protoshield on the underside
    - have to replace headers on the arduino
    - a lot of work
    - it's weird that nobody does this and there may be a reason.
1. [ProtoScrewShield](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/9729) - mounted inbetween arduino and button/LCD shield
    - [will the RJ45 Breakout fit?](https://www.sparkfun.com/products/716)
3. Custom Circuit Board
    - sort of expensive
    - permanent
    - a bit risky - if we get it wrong it's double the cost
 
## Add positionable mount for sonar sensor

Should be able to rotate left, right, up & down. 

[There seems to be Sonar mounts that exist already for robots.](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=sonar+sensor+ping+mount&atb=v136-1&iar=images&iax=images&ia=images) and on [Thingiverse](https://www.thingiverse.com/search?q=sonar&dwh=655d02734e5d166) Can we do better? Laser-cut case?

Positioning could be done with a [Ball-head Mount and a 1/4 Screw head](https://www.thingiverse.com/search?q=sonar&dwh=655d02734e5d166) coming off the project box.

![Ball Head Mount Image](docs/img/ballheadmount.jpg "")

## Add sound

Lower priority

Need to determine how - what board? Would be great to use bluetooth and connect to a bluetooth enabled speaker, they seem to be around and affordable.

## Other improvements in any category - aesthetics, stability, usability

# Part 3: The Making

Get parts, make adjustments, refine, test, new ideas for improvements, make, test, refine, etc.

# Part 4: Documentation and Instructions

We should do this as we go along. It starts now!

# Part 5: Physical door (if there’s time)

Experiment with designs, or creating specifications for building on site.
